Please tell us your name. I'm Lagi Menkare
Nasorona. Dendul Lama. Dendul Lama. Thank
you. His Holiness the Dalai Lama asked us
to record your experiences so that we can
share your memories with many generations
of Tibetans, the Chinese, and the rest of
the world. Your memories will help us to
document the true history, culture, and
beliefs of the Tibetan people.
Do you give permission for the Tibet Oral
History Project to use this interview?
Thank you very much for offering to share
your story with us. During this interview,
if at any time you want to take a break or
stop, please let us know.
And if you do not want to answer a
question or talk about something, let us
know.
If your interview were to be shown in
Tibet or China, Would this be a problem
for you?
There will be no problems. Thank you. And
we're very honored to record your story
and appreciate very much your
participation in the project.
How old are you?
71.
And where are you from in Tibet?
So the place
where I lived was called La Gong. And in
which province was La Gong?
I came to Lhasa in 1961-62 when the
Chinese created a lot of problems.
Where were you born? In which province?
So when you came to Lhasa, you were about
how old?
So I must have been about 36 years old and
when I came to Lhasa I had three children
with me and then three were born in Lhasa.
Okay.
So that's been so long ago. In your
village, what did your father do? When we
ourselves were Jon. We thought to eat it
with a spoon. And we ate the soup with
that spoon. On that day, the children
made, a pot of tea Agricca, which they ate
with fish. It burned in the bath. What did
they eat with that? They ate with that
masks, and put it on the ground, and put
it into the buddy egg, because they ate
with it, So in those days my father was a
farmer working in the commune and then we
would dig up medicinal plants called poppy
from the ground. So you were in a commune,
a Tibetan commune, or was this a Chinese
commune? How decrease power the body and
mind So clearly the mind and heart is
different So when V peak can conclude that
After all everything is good This equally
increase the way of life Know that can
know that That was good Their mind
So it was a Tibetan commune run by
Chinese, and when the farmers harvested
grains and wheat and barley, we would have
to give them to the Chinese. So being
unable to endure the suffering, my husband
and I and children fled. went to Lhasa.
Went to Lhasa, right. So what memories do
you have of your childhood when you were a
little girl?
What should I say
about when I was little?
I have no memories of my younger days.
What did your mother do? Are the Evökan
people, who lived during Ruanduna
boundaries and years old? Yes, some of
them, who were born in theisk of the
Pekdaya people, Por accounting for their
responsabilies in the past, After the old
age, the families came back to work to pay
our rent,
So in the
commune, she was, she had the task of
milking, and then also carrying hay on the
back to be spread under the horses and
mules. And then after we escaped, I had no
idea about them, but I think they have all
passed away now. So did you help your
mother or your father with their work on
the commune? Yes. When did you start
working on the commune?
No,
because I had little children then, and so
instead of helping them, I needed their
help.
How old were you when you had your first
child? Amala, puku tangbo dikye di
lokhajire? Puku tangbo shere la. Takonjo
shere lokhajire. Nga zon de de lokhajire.
Nga zon de de lokhajire. So we
don't normally calculate our years and
ages. So it was like, you know, animals
giving birth. Likewise, we too gave birth
to our children. Do your children live
with you now?
No, not together. I have three children,
and I had my children in the hospital. Can
you tell us about your experiences giving
birth to children? So, Marwa, you are a
very good teacher. You have taught us a
lot of things. So, what do you think about
teaching us how to be a good teacher? I
don't know how to teach. I have been
teaching since I was a child. I have been
teaching since I was a child. I don't know
how to teach. I don't know how to teach. I
don't know how to teach. I don't know how
to teach.
So I didn't give
birth
in hospitals and it was my husband that
helped me during the childbirth. and it
is only my daughter that was born in
hospital and I couldn't give birth to her
and all my other children including the
twins were not born in hospital. How did
your husband help you?
I was a little girl, and I was a little
girl. I was a little girl, and I was a
little girl. I was a little girl, and I
was a little girl. I was a little girl,
and I was a little girl. I was a little
girl, and I was a little girl. I was a
little girl, and I was a little girl. I
was a little girl, and I was a little
girl.
So when the first of the twins was born, I
was on my knees and my husband, he took
the child wrapped it in cloth and laid it
on the bed and then I went out to answer
nature's call and then I could feel that
there was another child in me and so I
told my husband that there is one more
child and he said it can't be but then I
said there is one more and then the other
one was born and while breastfeeding I had
to feed one child here and one child here
and it was same when I was feeding them
food later. At the same time, feeding them
one here, one here? At the same time.
Thujujjipa le chikla omadetje, chikla
omadetje, roa? Nyaka tew. Nyaka ngode.
Ngode nyaka sumte omadetje. Yes, because
both cried at the same time. Cried, cried.
And were all your children healthy when
they were born? Amla, puku ketiw ka ne
puku tsangma tangpo duwe?
Khunpa kept on watching the holy ones also
when he was praying, but the ladiesarmy
joining them also didn't want him
anything.
Khunpa kept on watching and touching theتي
places.
So the second of the twins was born leg
first, and I thought it was a headless
child. And then my husband pulled it out,
and there was no crying, so I thought it
wasn't alive. and when I touched the leg
it was warm and then my husband cleaned it
up. How did you feel? Can you remember
your emotions?
I was very young. I was very young.
I was very young. I was very young. I was
very young. I was very young. I was very
young. I was very young. I was very young.
I was very young. I was very young. I was
very young.
I was very young.
So the twins, you know, if one child got
sick around 12 o'clock, the other would
become sick at 3 p.m. So both had to be
carried to the hospital in Pasa, and it
was very difficult. And then later my
husband found work at a construction site,
and I could also find work but I couldn't
do much as I was sick most of the time. So
when you were sick, who took care of your
children?
There wasn't anyone else to take care of
them. I had to, and then when my husband
returned from work, then we took care of
them together. Right. So when you lived in
Lhasa, did you have family who also lived
in Lhasa or lived near you? We didn't have
any relatives. We didn't have any
relatives. We didn't have any relatives.
We didn't have any relatives. No, both of
us didn't have any relatives. it is. So
you said that you went to Lhasa and you
had three children. What made your family
go to Lhasa?
So we had to leave our hometown because we
couldn't survive there. there, there was
lack of food because if you couldn't work
hard, there was no grains for you, and
then since we had many children, both of
us couldn't survive there and that's why
my husband suggested that we go to Lhasa.
Why wasn't there enough food? And Magali,
how do you do the work? We do it by hand.
We do it by hand. We do it by hand. We do
it by hand. We do it by hand.
So in the commune system, you know, if you
could work, the officials gave you marks,
and if you didn't, you know, there was no
marks, which meant that you got no grains.
But you worked, didn't you? Did you eat
anything?
We did,
but there was nothing to eat, so we left.
Was it because you had so many children
that what you were allowed, what you were
allocated wasn't enough?
bombalo I was able to get a lot of money
from the government. I was able to get a
lot of money from the government. I was
able to get a lot of money from the
government. Yeah,
the allocation wasn't sufficient. And then
when we were in Lhasa, a friend of my
husband suggested that, that since we had
many children, that if we went to Nepal,
it would be a better life for the
children. So that's why we came to Nepal.
Right. We'll come back to Nepal in a
minute, but I was wondering in what ways
was life in Lhasa different from life in
the village?
The
So it was better in Lhasa because my
husband was engaged in the construction
work and then friends and other people,
they used to give us little bags of
Sambar. Were there other ways in which
your life in Lhasa was different from the
village? You had more food, but were there
other ways in which your life was
different?
I don't know, I can't say.
So I have only so much to say. Right. So
your family decided to come to Nepal. Can
you tell us the story of coming to Nepal?
But this new heart's embedded in her
stomach and made of bamboo. and she
was anywhere from 58
to
900 years old. It was a land state of five
countries,
added
So from Lhasa there were times when we
were on foot, and at times for an hour or
two we would ply by vehicles but since we
didn't have money to pay we couldn't get
vehicles right through and it was from the
border area of Tengri and Tamo that we
came to Nepal and we were with quite a
number of little children and my husband
was carrying one of the twins over his his
neck and the oldest son was carrying one
of the other twins and the pathway was
filled with snow and there were some
Chinese people along the way that stopped
us but since we were with little children
they allowed us to go and in fact there
were two girls that commented that the
twins were very beautiful and then thanks
thanks to the grace of his holiness we
were able to escape safely How long did it
take you to come from Lhasa to Nepal?
So it might have taken about half a month,
because at times we were walking and at
times we could get lift in some vehicles.
So what did you take with you when you
left Tibet?
So we had brought nothing except our
blankets and a little bit of Tsampa. And
when we reached Nepal, my husband had
friends to whom we sent message, and they
came to fetch us at the reception
committee office. And did you have enough
food, enough sampa, for your whole family
to go for these two weeks?
There was 200,000 Royal doctor! The police
need to come immediately The police has
come and arrested a woman I leave her ...
She is bedridden I need to take her to the
police Pleasechen But I do not want toatar
I was a little girl, and I was a little
girl. I was a little girl, and I was a
little girl. I was a little girl, and I
was a little girl. I was a little girl,
and I was a little girl. I was a little
girl, and I was a little girl. I was a
little girl, and I was a little girl. I
was a little girl, and I was a little
girl. I was a little girl, and I was a
little girl. I was a little girl, and I
was a little girl.
So we had, yes, a little bit of tsampa,
and I used to feed the children in
spoonfuls, which they used to gulp and
then we were able to you know cross over a
mountain and there was a river and nearby
we found some Nepalese police and we were
really very scared and I told my husband
you know will they not kill us now and
then we met some merchants who said that
now you need have no fear because you will
you are in Nepalese territory and you will
no longer fall into Chinese hands But
still they were very scared. And then we
saw some Nepali road crew and they were
living in little tents. And so we entered
one of the tents and they gave us hot
water and I made little balls of dough
with the Sampa and hot water and fed my
children. And then we went to Dharamsala
and we were very happy to see His Holiness
the Dalai So you arrived in Nepal and then
how did you get to Dharamsala?
The reception committee there dropped us
to Dharamsala. I want to go back to make
sure I've understood something. So your
decision to leave Nepal, I mean to leave
Tibet, was because of hunger? What was the
reason why you left Tibet? Tibet.
So the reason
why we left our hometown forvariy was the
lack of food and livelihood and hasa was
better and then in the hometown but Our
children were not getting any education in
hasa so and we were told that if we went
to Nepal We would be able to admit our
children into school. So for the sake of
our children So you
lived in Tibet when the Chinese were there
How is life like for you under the
Chinese?
So I do not have much knowledge. That's
between in the offices, that happens, and
my job was just doing my work. And your
work was what? What was your work?
So our responsibility was harvesting the
parni and then de-husking them in a large
open ground during the commune, but I have
forgotten much of it. What about in Lhasa?
What was your work in Lhasa? So, it's
like
what I told you earlier, here,
constructing houses, digging the ground,
laying the bricks, and building as it
happens here. You did that? Amla adina la
lera chey na, kama basura dwe adina la?
Nga lera ka zote me na, nade. Lera ka zote
me. No, I couldn't go to work because I
was sick. Right. Okay. Did you have any
interactions with Chinese people?
No.
So did life change for you when the
Chinese came to Tibet?
Yes,
in In 1961-62, by then the Chinese had
already launched the liberation. And at
that time, when my husband and I escaped,
there wasn't many people escaping then,
but later on, more and more people started
coming. And what happened then? We were in
the same house. You mean the same house?
No.
Once we were at the reception center here
and then we were sent to see His Holiness
the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala and then the
children were put in school and then my
husband and I we were sent to a factory in
Dalahousey in Himachal Pradesh and then
there was no problem at all. Was your
husband affected at all by the Chinese
occupation?
he starts to crochet some 다른loeWhen he
designing this Let me see that's the
kurva
worker in Pasar and he was you know laying
the iron rods for the construction and
then after coming into India then he
worked as a embosser of handmade carpets.
Right at the beginning you mentioned that
most of your children except for your last
child were born at home but one child was
born in the hospital. Why was that child
born in the hospital? What caused you to
take that, you know, go to the hospital
for that?
So I was having labor pains but could not
give birth so that's why I went to the
hospital. And your baby was safe? Now you
know you have to carry on the
discipleship. Yes. We are going to keep
going because we are already deeply in
love with you.
Just in time, I will be if I have the
sense of you coming into housing, as you
can see
Yes, the last child was born in hospital
after five or six days. actually the labor
pains had started and the child wasn't
born so the nurse told me that I would
have to stay in hospital for a few days
because it was a big child but I didn't
want to stay and wanted to go back home
and my husband said that you know I
wouldn't take me home saying that you know
if we went back home that child and I
would die. Is there anything else that you
would like to share with us about your
life in Tibet? .
That's about it.
Thank you. If this interview were shown in
Tibet or China, would it be a problem for
you? .
I don't know
whether there will be any problems or no
problems. Is it okay if we use your real
name? I think that's a good thing. I think
that's a good thing. I think that's a good
thing. Yes, it is. If I had a child, I
would have a child. Yes, but then if the
Chinese come and investigate, they may
take me away. Thank you very much for
sharing your story with us.